This is a text extract from https://www.homesmartmesh.com/

it consists of the first section 'Netowrks' but 'Frameworks, Applications, Assistans' have been omitted

# Networks
Ethernet and wifi being used by most generic consumer devices is very convenient and is used wherever it is possible. Even smaller devices with relatively low power such as ESP32 can use wifi, which solves all communication questions and can even provide a webserver hosted on the microcontroller. Usage of websocket allow browsers and webapps such as Home 3D to be independent from proxy servers which increases the flexibility of the client servers architecture and allows clients to run on any device (Smartphone / PC : mac, win,linux). MQTT lowers the application overhead in comparison to REST API and solves all communication scenarios with client polling and server based events notification.

The 2.4 GHz range clusters in two groups, user centered environment and Autonomous server based environment. The user, expected to be armed with a smartphone, has placed the Bluetooth as main protocol for device to user direct interactions. Although Bluetooth is catching up by adding support for Mesh, this mixes of concerns in order to win market over mesh based devices has kept support for Bluetooth mesh marginal. Zigbee, based on the 802.15.4 standard, has well succeeded into providing products suited for home applications. Currently support is added for sub GHz, but most devices operate in the 2.4 GHz. Limitations from both frequency and transmission power have been solved by the mesh protocol, where light bulbs, as first target of Zigbee, play the role of routers. If to think about a mesh at home, what a better location for a router than in the center of the room, right on the ceiling for obstacle avoidance and in a spot with access to power supply to allow permanent radio listening and packets routing, and this is where the light bulbs are usually placed.

Zigbee has been struggling with profiles compatibility which challenges users’s understanding and trust of compatibility. The standard’s focus moved from ZLL (Zigbee Light Link) to ZHA (Zigbee Home Automation), then to Zigbee 3.0 keeping retro compatibility at device level (not routing level). Is Thread going to supersede Zigbee ? The question is rather when ? Thread, using ipv6, provides a generic resolution of addresses between local networks and internet which is standard defined and vendor agnostic. In order to catch up and not to lose the market, the Zigbee alliance are pushing the “dot dot” to grow to application level for both protocols, and hope to allow products smoothly transit and support both. At the same time, Thread came with a concept allowing MQTT-SN (Sensor’s Network) to run at the node level, which still does not replace the zigbee applicative layer. So last but not least, and as a response to this situation, the Zigbee aliance is deviating the focus from dot dot to the favor of an attempt to unify everyone with Matter Protocol which is so to say the ipv6 capable zigbee (as it uses the Zigbee Clusetr Library at the application level) and backed up by the big tech companies.

How can a user invest in a home equipment without getting deprecated before the installation is complete ? How can a user use his favorite User Interface with his favorite Light bulbs and Sensors ? And this without requiring Hacker’s skills ? These are still open questions.
